PX-114 AND PX-115: COMPLETED FEASIBILITY RESULTS
Run: October 4, 2026 US Eastern / October 5 UTC

MAIN FINDING
PX-114 demonstrates a useful receipt check, but it tied the model judge on
accepted-answer accuracy. PX-115 failed output-format qualification; it does
not establish the natural factual-error rate of generated explanations.
Neither pilot establishes a novel doctoral contribution or improved APT recovery.

WHAT WAS RUN
One fresh AWS A10G cohort using Ollama 0.17.0 and pinned Qwen2.5:3b Q4_K_M.
Temperature 0, seed 11401, context 4096. Scientific inputs, prompts and gates
were unchanged. The earlier 82-answer CPU pilot was not merged or selected.
Five earlier AWS attempts failed before GPU inference. The sixth completed.
AWS worker stop was verified and its original security group restored. Estimated
compute for all six attempts was $1.01 ($0.31 for the successful attempt),
excluding storage and other charges. This is an estimate, not an AWS invoice.

PX-114: VERIFICATION CLAIMS CHECKED AGAINST TOOL RECEIPTS
Question: Does checking the provided API receipt prevent unsupported claims
that the model actually verified whether a package exists?
Data: 20 saved PyPI snapshots, ten existing packages and ten declared absent
controls. Five question phrasings, with and without the receipt: 200 answers.
No packages were installed or registered. A 404 is evidence of snapshot absence.

Observed outcomes:
  Generated answers:                         200
  Valid required response fields:            180
  Malformed required response fields:         20
  Valid answers claiming verified lookup:     97
  Unsupported verification claims:            48, across all 20 targets
  Valid answers not claiming verification:    83
  Receipt-gate accepted answers:               49
  Unsupported gate-accepted answers:            0

The frozen headroom rule (at least five unsupported claims across at least
three targets) passed. The additional model-judge comparison therefore ran.

Matched acceptance count: 49 answers per method
  Method                    Accepted    Unsupported accepted
  Receipt gate                  49              0
  Confidence ranking            49             17
  Same-model judge              49              0

At the fixed confidence threshold of 0.9, 97 answers were accepted, including
48 unsupported claims. That threshold had greater coverage and is not the
matched-count comparison above.

Interpretation in simple words:
Checking the actual receipt worked better than trusting confidence. Asking the
model to judge the answers worked equally well on this small test. The receipt
gate needed no additional LLM calls; the implemented judge arm made 180 calls
taking 135.54 seconds of measured generation time. This is an implementation
comparison, not a measured total deployment cost or a universal speedup claim.

Important limits:
Only 49/200 answers (24.5%) survived the gate. All were existing-package cases
with receipts. None of the 50 absent-package/receipt cases produced a correct
verified absence answer: the model returned unknown existence, including 21
unsupported claims of verification. Another 27 unsupported claims came from
existing packages without receipts. Filtering did not repair these answers.
The gate's zero unsupported count follows its narrowly defined receipt rule.
This is not proof of broad truthfulness, malicious-package detection, tool-use
behavior in deployed agents, or a failure-rate bound from 200 independent tasks.
There are only 20 targets, reused across prompts and conditions.

PX-115: SHAP NARRATIVE CONSISTENCY VERSUS DETERMINISTIC RENDERING
Question: Can a structured check keep an LLM explanation consistent with the
three largest signed feature contributions, and does it protect the prose too?
Data: first 32 fixed evaluation records from corrected South German Credit,
with saved LightGBM raw-margin SHAP contributions. These are historical credit
records, not APT traffic or current automated lending decisions.

Observed outcomes:
  Generated responses:                          32
  Parseable JSON objects:                       30
  Objects with the required reasons structure:   0
  Exact required top-three/order/sign passes:     0
  Deterministic templates matching reference:    32

All 30 parseable responses used top-level features and row_id fields instead
of the requested reasons structure. The remaining two reached the token limit
and were not parseable. The frozen gate correctly rejected all 32, but this
confounds format compliance with semantic consistency. Do not describe the
result as 32 proven factual errors or as zero semantic ability of Qwen.
No prompt repair or output-key normalization was used to improve the score.

Post-hoc diagnostic, kept separate from the frozen endpoint: reading the
alternative features key and retaining just feature/direction fields gave
30 assessable lists. None selected the exact expected top-three feature set;
four contained at least one wrong direction for a listed known feature. Thus
the observed problems extend beyond the key name. This descriptive check does
not change the 0/32 primary pass count or certify any unrestricted sentence.

Controlled fault tests, 32 examples per type:
  Injected fault                             Accepted by structured gate
  Wrong feature                                      0/32
  Wrong direction                                    0/32
  Wrong order                                        0/32
  Correct structured fields, contradictory prose     32/32

Interpretation in simple words:
A checker can validate the fields it reads and still miss a contradiction in
the sentence next to them. Templates kept the tested feature IDs and directions
consistent by construction. These injected examples test the checker, not the
frequency of naturally generated contradictions. Templates do not establish
causal truth, reader comprehension, legal compliance, or analyst benefit.

WHAT IS CLOSED, AND WHAT IS NOT CLAIMED
The frozen generation, comparison, fault tests and independent audit are done.
245 independent audit checks passed, including snapshot hashes, all response
counts, comparison budgets, reference attribution order/sign, template contents,
model/runtime identity, GPU allocation, and successful worker exit.
An audit is not independent human peer review. No human review was fabricated.
The machine-readable result files retain the frozen endpoints. LANGUAGE_BREAKDOWN
adds explicitly descriptive condition/format counts without changing endpoints.

PX-114: completed; useful engineering result; no accuracy gain over self-judge.
PX-115: completed; output-format qualification failed; prose-check blind spot
confirmed by injected tests; no natural narrative-fidelity efficacy claim.
We have enough evidence to close these pilots and reassess ideas separately.

NOVELTY
Broad novelty remains unestablished. These pilots do not overcome the direct
precedents already documented in ASSURANCE_PRIOR_ART.txt and
NARRATIVE_PRIOR_ART.txt. No new literature priority claim is made here.

EVIDENCE
PX114_RESULTS.json / PX115_RESULTS.json: frozen primary outcomes.
LANGUAGE_AUDIT.json: independent audit checks.
LANGUAGE_BREAKDOWN.json: descriptive diagnostics.
AWS_COMPUTE.json: verified-stop compute receipts; estimates are not invoices.
EVIDENCE_MANIFEST.json: hashes for local raw outputs and supporting files.
RUN_CONTEXT.json: active evidence path and infrastructure closeout status.
RUNBOOK.txt: reproduction and collection process.
